Clarified database connections lifetime outside HTTP requests. (#14082)
django/django: docs/ref/databases.txt

----------------------

Persistent connections avoid the overhead of reestablishing a connection to
the database in each :class:`~django.http.HttpRequest` request. They're
controlled by the :setting:`CONN_MAX_AGE` parameter which defines the maximum
lifetime of a connection. It can be set independently for each database.

The default value is ``0``, preserving the historical behavior of closing the
database connection at the end of each :class:`~django.http.HttpRequest`. To
enable persistent connections, set :setting:`CONN_MAX_AGE` to a positive

> integer of seconds. For unlimited persistent connections, set it to ``None``.

Reviewer: I would undo all these changes and just have the first reference to `request` be `HTTP request`.

appropriate value at the beginning of each request, or disable persistent
connections.

If a connection is created in a long-running process, outside of Django’s

> request / response cycle, the connection will remain open until explicitly

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
request-response cycle, the connection will remain open until explicitly
```

appropriate value at the beginning of each request, or disable persistent
connections.

If you use database connections outside of the context of
:class:`~django.http.HttpRequest` requests, Django will not close the
connection and will keep using the connection created after the first database

> query.

Reviewer 3: I found this addition a little confusing because it made me think.... does this mean the connection **never** gets closed?

So outside a request response cycle, we are probably talking about things like management commands (the shell included). At the end of a management command, django closes all of the database connections - you can see this here: https://github.com/django/django/blob/2b11740e1d9d23ef53d94a1c45896fb7b91df908/django/core/management/base.py#L425
I'm not sure how to rephrase this to make it clear that people shouldn't panic that they need to manually close database connections when they have finished doing something in the shell for example.

What do you think?

Author: > So outside a request response cycle, we are probably talking about things like management commands (the shell included).

That depends, what sparked this PR was me using the Django ORM in some Python logic, without ever going through a web server/WSGI.

> At the end of a management command, django closes all of the database connections - you can see this here:

Does this apply also to manual uses of the ORM (e.g. queries made with a `Manager`, e.g. `objects`)? Because this does not match my experience (the connection was created only at the beginning of the Python logic and never closed/reopened until the end of the process).

> What do you think?

If your concern is just the management shell, I think we can add an extra sentence to explicitly rule that out. But I think we should first make sure we agree on the actual issue addressed by this PR.

Reviewer 3: > queries made with a Manager, e.g. objects

No sorry I didn't mean the model manager. I meant when you run `manage.py <some-example-management-command>` (eg. shell or migrate - there are quite a lot that django provides and [you can also write your own](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.2/howto/custom-management-commands/)). 

So your experience is correct :+1:

> and never closed/reopened until the end of the process

:point_up: This is what I am trying to refer to, at the end, django closes the connection

> me using the Django ORM in some Python logic

Can you be more specific? Where/how does that Python logic get run/triggered?

Reviewer 3: Ah so in your case it not a django project, then what I said about it closing at the end around management commands does not apply and yes django wouldn't help you - I'm on the same page (sorry took me some time to get there)

---
In my opinion, as this is not the standard use case, this paragraph can cause confusion. If you reduce the docs to just the http request references, I am happy to approve. :+1: 

If you want the additional paragraph, I would like to see how common this use case is. If it's common enough, maybe we would even need a topic like "Using the django orm as a standalone" and the setup and comments around connections can be described in there. We could even add features to make this easier :woman_shrugging: 

Personally, I want to see either community input that this fills some documentation gap (that doesn't belong in a blog post) and an accepted ticket to add this into the docs. :heavy_check_mark: 

But that's just my opinion, so I would be interested in what @nessita and @felixxm think?

Author: I am fine with that. IMHO the point of the PR was just to somehow provide a warning that Django does not really manage the DB connection for you outside of the standard use case. If you can find a better formulation for this statement, I am more than willing to update the PR.

Reviewer: Thank you @sarahboyce and @albertosottile for the many clarifications around the changes.

Considering the above, I would suggest that we:

1- Remove the link to HttpRequest as originally request and perhaps say "HTTP request" the first time "request" is mentioned.

2- We add a small and concise paragraph similar to the one in https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.2/topics/db/transactions/#controlling-transactions-explicitly:

```suggestion
If a connection is created in a long-running process, outside of Django’s
request / response cycle, the connection will remain open until explicitly
closed.
```
